---
sidebar_position: 14
sidebar_label: Packaging
title: "Packaging your Plugin"
---

Plugins must be built and packaged before being being published or distributed. We have been using for local plugin development a "vanilla" Backstage project created with the Backstage CLI, and we will always keep it clean and simple.

A real-world normal Backstage build will refer to released plugins as dependencies during build time. A real world VeeCode DevPortal instance will dynamically load plugins during start time instead.

## Build the plugin

To build all plugins under the host Backstage project just go to its root folder and run:

```bash
yarn tsc
yarn build:all
```

This will generate a `dist` folder under each plugin folder and a `dist-types` folder under the root folder.

## Package the plugin

You can now package the plugin using the `npm pack` command:

```bash
cd plugins/<your-plugin>
npm pack
```

:::warning
If you get "missing a backstage.pluginPackages" error, run `yarn fix --publish` at the project root folder and try again.
:::

## Publish the plugin

A published plugin becomes available to other Backstage projects who wish to statically link it.

Check if your plugin is marked as "private" in its `package.json` file. If it is, remove the "private" field or set it to `false`:

```json
{
  "name": "@something/your-plugin",
  "private": false,
  ...
}
```

You can now publish the plugin to npm using the `npm publish` command:

```bash
cd plugins/<your-plugin>
npm publish
```

:::tip
You can rely on a local npm registry like [Verdaccio](https://verdaccio.org/) for development and testing purposes. Verdaccio can be started with a simple command:
```
verdaccio -l 0.0.0.0:4873
```
:::

If you are using a local registry like Verdaccio, just add its URL:

```bash
npm publish --registry http://localhost:4873
```

## Publish a Dynamic Plugin

A dynamic plugin is a plugin that can be loaded at runtime. It is a plugin that is not statically linked to the host Backstage project, but is loaded at start time.

Technically, a dynamic plugin is just a slightly different repackaging of a regular plugin, but with a different name.

To create a dynamic package run this command at the plugin folder *after you have already built and packaged it successfully* as a "normal" plugin:

```bash
cd plugins/<your-plugin>
npx @red-hat-developer-hub/cli@latest plugin export
```

The distributed version of the plugin will now be available in a new `dist-dynamic` folder. You can now package and publish it as a dynamic plugin:

```bash
cd dist-dynamic
npm pack
npm publish --registry <your-local-registry-url>
```

:::info
The `@red-hat-developer-hub/cli` replaced the old `@janus-idp/cli` tool for dynamic plugin exporting. You may still find references to the old tool in the documentation or pages that were not yet updated.
:::

## Packaging Options

A dynamic plugin is usually packaged and published to a private npm registry, but you have other options:

- You can export the plugin to an OCI registry like Quay.io or Docker Hub (just use `npx @red-hat-developer-hub/cli@latest plugin package` instead of `export`)
- You can use the `tgz` file generated by the `npm pack` command:
    - Host it in an internal web server and use its URL in the `package` field *or*
    - Use a local path in the `package` field (use volume mounts or a custom image)
- You can bundle the plugin within a custom DevPortal image and use a local path in the `package` field (thus making it another preloaded plugin).

There are a few other options too, but they are not recommended for production use. We will not cover them here, for we recommend using an internal npm registry like Nexus, Artifactory or even Verdaccio.

You can find more info on these packaging options in [Red Hat Developer Hub documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/1.7/html-single/installing_and_viewing_plugins_in_red_hat_developer_hub/index#assembly-package-publish-third-party-dynamic-plugin). Both VeeCode DevPortal and RHDH use the same dynamic loading mechanism.

## Additional Notes

It becomes clear that plugins may have a release cycle of their own, and any DevPortal instance should be able to load the specific plugins it chooses. 

Dynamic plugins are tipically published to a private npm registry, and the DevPortal instance will load them from there.